---
title: Kafka ACL
date: 2023-12-08 00:07 -0800
categories: [kafka, acl]
tags: [kafka, acl]
---

## Authentication vs Authorization

Authentication and authorization are two different concepts. Authentication
answers the question "who can log in to the system?" Authorization answers what
you can do after login. Authentication is pre-step of authorization.

Authorization is important for Kafka because in a enterprise environment we
need to set up different permissions for different user groups when using
Kafka. It is better to be role based permission control.

## Authorization

Before I tried to dig into Kafka authorization process. A few questions pop up
in my mind:

1. Is the authentication user the same as the authorization user?
2. what is the inter-broker communication user?
3. Why could I not find any user in the Kafka configuration?
4. How is `allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found` used?

## Authorization process

The entry point is inside
[KafkaApis.scala](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/2.8.1/core/src/main/scala/kafka/server/KafkaApis.scala#L411-L411).
It has an `AuthHelper` member variable which is a wrapper on top of a
authorizer. The actual implementation is
[AclAuthorizer.scala](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/2.8.1/core/src/main/scala/kafka/security/authorizer/AclAuthorizer.scala#L436-L436)
and its method `authorizeAction`.

To summarized the authorization precedence:

1. is principal is a super user, action is authorized.
2. If no ACL exits for this specified for this particular resource,
   1. If `allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found` is true, then action is authorized.
   2. Otherwise, action is denied.
3. Deny-ACL does not exists for this principal and Allow-ACL exits for this
   principal, then this action is authorized, otherwise it is denied.

A few notes. First, when no ACL exits for the particular resource, the decision
is totally determined by configuration `allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found`. If
won't check further. Second, `allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found` is checked for
this specific resource. If does not mean there is no ACL for any resource. Say,
we have ACL for resource type `CLUSTER` and action `ALTER_CONFIGS` for some
principal. Then, we have a request for resource type `CLUSTER` and action
`CLUSTER_ACTION`, is `allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found` applied here? No. In this
case, There is an ACL for this resource type. Third, for an action to be
approved, it should not show up in deny acl and also must show in allow acl.
Both conditions show be met.

## Add/remove ACL

Class `AclAuthorizer` also provide commands to manage ACLs. In this class there
are two admin clients to use. One is through bootstrap connection and the other
uses Zookeeper connection directly. What are their difference? Bootstrap
connection will talk to Kafka broker and this process is regulated by ACL as
well. So if the user does not have permission to manage ACLs, then it will
fail. Using Zookeeper connection is different. As long as you are
authenticated, you can change ACLs, so it bypasses authorization. That is why
[MSK documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/msk-acls.html)
uses Zookeeper connection as demonstration.

By the way, MSK provides two Zookeeper connection strings: TLS and PLAINTEXT.
Which one should we use? We can use PLAINTEXT only if `zookeeper.set.acl=false`
in MSK. See
[code](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/2.8.1/core/src/main/scala/kafka/security/authorizer/AclAuthorizer.scala#L172-L172).

Authorization answers the question: "Is principal X allowed to perform action Y
on resource Z?" The principal is a user. Action can be read, write, update,
configure, etc. Resource could be cluster, topic, group, etc. Not all
combinations is valid, so what are the supported operations? See
[code](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/2.8.1/core/src/main/scala/kafka/security/authorizer/AclEntry.scala#L99-L99).
Also,
[AclOperation.ALL](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/2.8.1/core/src/main/scala/kafka/admin/AclCommand.scala#L482-L482)
is a valid option too.

A small note about writing these options on command line. The first time I read
examples online such as `kafka-acl.sh --option Read ...`. I was curious why
operation is `Read` not `READ`? `READ` is the enum name, not `Read`. Then I
found the lookup uses Pascal case. See
[code](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/2.8.1/clients/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/common/utils/SecurityUtils.java#L54-L54).
Moreover, enum `CLUSTER_ACTION` becomes `ClusterAction` in Pascal case. The
underscore is removed.

Another note is about AWS MSK. It does not support super user, so we need to
mimic one by ourselves. According to
[this post](https://repost.aws/questions/QUPLKdkgDPQ_uH8LaLhB8bew/how-to-create-a-super-user-on-msk),
we should not assign action `CLUSTER_ACTION` to the super user.

Some examples to add/remove ACLs are below

```
./bin/kafka-acls.sh --authorizer-properties zookeeper.connect=${ZK} --add --allow-principal "User:CN=*.test1.g8tfbi.c2.kafka.us-east-2.amazonaws.com" --allow-principal "User:msk-user" --operation All --group=* --topic=* --transactional-id=* --delegation-token=*

./bin/kafka-acls.sh --authorizer-properties zookeeper.connect=${ZK} --add --allow-principal "User:CN=*.test1.g8tfbi.c2.kafka.us-east-2.amazonaws.com" --allow-principal "User:msk-user" --operation Create --operation DescribeConfigs --operation AlterConfigs --operation IdempotentWrite --operation Alter --operation Describe --cluster
```

## Inter-broker authorization

So far, we keep talking about how a client/user is authenticated and authorized
to access Kafka. Inter-broker communication is also controlled by ACLs. Both
client/user and brokers are called `principal` in Kafka ACL's terminology.

What authorization method used by inter-broker communication? We can get this
info from cluster configuration `listener.security.protocol.map`. For example,
below config is obtained from a test MSK cluster. It uses `SSL` authorization
for `REPLICATION_SECURE` listener which is the inter-broker communication as it
is configured by `inter.broker.listener.name`.

```
listener.security.protocol.map=CLIENT:PLAINTEXT,CLIENT_SECURE:SSL,CLIENT_SECURE_PUBLIC:SSL,CLIENT_SASL_SCRAM:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_SASL_SCRAM_PUBLIC:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_IAM:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_IAM_PUBLIC:SASL_SSL,REPLICATION:PLAINTEXT,REPLICATION_SECURE:SSL,CONTROLLER:PLAINTEXT,CONTROLLER_SECURE:SSL,CLIENT_SASL_SCRAM_VPCE:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_IAM_VPCE:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_SECURE_VPCE:SSL sensitive=false synonyms={STATIC_BROKER_CONFIG:listener.security.protocol.map=CLIENT:PLAINTEXT,CLIENT_SECURE:SSL,CLIENT_SECURE_PUBLIC:SSL,CLIENT_SASL_SCRAM:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_SASL_SCRAM_PUBLIC:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_IAM:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_IAM_PUBLIC:SASL_SSL,REPLICATION:PLAINTEXT,REPLICATION_SECURE:SSL,CONTROLLER:PLAINTEXT,CONTROLLER_SECURE:SSL,CLIENT_SASL_SCRAM_VPCE:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_IAM_VPCE:SASL_SSL,CLIENT_SECURE_VPCE:SSL, DEFAULT_CONFIG:listener.security.protocol.map=PLAINTEXT:PLAINTEXT,SSL:SSL,SASL_PLAINTEXT:SASL_PLAINTEXT,SASL_SSL:SASL_SSL}


inter.broker.listener.name=REPLICATION_SECURE sensitive=false synonyms={STATIC_BROKER_CONFIG:inter.broker.listener.name=REPLICATION_SECURE}
```

OK. What is the principal for `SSL` authorization? The relevant code is this
[build function](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/2.8.1/clients/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/common/security/authenticator/DefaultKafkaPrincipalBuilder.java#L115-L115).
The build function extracts the principal from a Authorization context. It has
a few cases:

- PLAINTEXT authentication corresponds to principal `User:ANONYMOUS`.
- SSL authentication corresponds to principal
  `User:<TLS certificate's distinguished name>`
- SASL authentication has two cases:
  - For SASL_GSSAPI, i.e., kerberos, the principal is
    `User:<kerberos short name>`.
  - Otherwise, it is `User:<SASL authorization ID>`.

(A rant: kerberos reminds my miserable memory at Citadel!)

Two questions: First, how to get the certificate's distinguished name? Second,
what is the SASL authorization id?

For question #1, we can take a look at a test MSK cluster. We get the TLS
certificate from one of the bootstrap broker.

```
root@msk-debug-664686f9d4-prwm7:~/kafka# openssl s_client -showcerts -connect b-1.staging2.68am5b.c2.kafka.us-east-2.amazonaws.com:9096 </dev/null
CONNECTED(00000003)
depth=2 C = US, O = Amazon, CN = Amazon Root CA 1
verify return:1
depth=1 C = US, O = Amazon, CN = Amazon RSA 2048 M01
verify return:1
depth=0 CN = *.staging2.68am5b.c2.kafka.us-east-2.amazonaws.com
verify return:1
---
Certificate chain
 0 s:CN = *.staging2.68am5b.c2.kafka.us-east-2.amazonaws.com
   i:C = US, O = Amazon, CN = Amazon RSA 2048 M01
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
...
-----END CERTIFICATE-----
```

Copy the certificate to a temp file `test.pem` and show the distinguished name
inside the certificate.

```
$ openssl x509 -in test.pem -noout -subject -nameopt rfc2253
subject= CN=*.staging2.68am5b.c2.kafka.us-east-2.amazonaws.com
```

So the distinguished name is
`CN=*.staging2.68am5b.c2.kafka.us-east-2.amazonaws.com`. Not `CN=` is part of
the name.

For question #2, SASL authentication id depends on the SASL mechanism used.
Checkout more details about SASL in my another node `sasl.md`. Basically, SASL
is a authentication framework, which contains many authentication mechanisms
client/server can negotiate to use. For Kafka, the most popular one is
`SCRAM-512` (Salted Challenge Response Authentication Mechanism). Basically,
server challenges client by asking difficult questions such as only the client
with true password can answer. The handshake process contains a few rounds of
`question-answer`. You can see more detail about Kafka's implementation
[here](https://github.com/apache/kafka/blob/main/clients/src/main/java/org/apache/kafka/common/security/scram/internals/ScramSaslServer.java#L49-L49).
This file is not long. It clearly says after successful authentication, the
authorization id is just the user name the client provides.

## Answer to my questions

1. Is the authentication user the same as the authorization user?  
   Yes.

2. what is the inter-broker communication user?  
   It depends on cluster configuration. For MSK, inter-broker communication is
   authorized by SSL. The principle name is the TLS certificate distinguished
   name.

3. Why could I not find any user in the Kafka configuration?  
   TODO: read the command

4. How is `allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found` used?  
   See above notes.
