---
layout: post
title: Vim
date: 2024-03-21 11:07 -0700
categories: [editor]
tags: [editor, vim]
---

Missing features:

- Cannot explore 3rd library file structure. In vscode, you can view them
  directly.

Smooth scrolling is very important.

When I started using nvim in a remote server, I immediately realized that
copying to clipboard does not work. A quick search led me to
[osc52](https://github.com/ojroques/nvim-osc52). The readme file provides
enough background about this issue and the solution. Also, any other plugins
that use clipboard breaks over ssh. For example, I use
[gitlinker](https://github.com/dingxiong/gitlinker.nvim) a lot, and it breaks.
I forked the repo and fix the issue for myself. I probably will raise a PR to
add OSC-52 support.

## Build

```
cd neovim
make
ln -s build/compile_commands.json compile_commands.json
```

We need this build step to see those generated files.

## Lua

What level of Lua knowledge is required to efficiently work with Neovim? I
believe you only need to read https://neovim.io/doc/user/lua.html .

## Vim APIs

### stdlib

Neovim has a lua stdlib. Basically, it is a bunch of C functions or submodules
that are exported to a Lua module `vim`. Because this module is auto loaded, we
do not need to explicitly import it. Therefore, we can write `vim.print(...)`
in our Lua code directly.

How this binding is done? It is done by the standard Lua function
`lua_pushcfunction` or `luaL_register`. The relevant code is
[here](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/blob/7e97c773e3ba78fcddbb2a0b9b0d572c8210c83e/src/nvim/lua/executor.c#L719).
You can see that `print` is set as a global function, and many other functions
are added. A few lines blow it calls `nlua_state_add_stdlib()` which loaded a
few more functions and submodules. We can use below script to print out all
stdlib.

```lua
for key, value in pairs(vim) do
    if type(value) == 'function' then
        print(key)
    end
end
```

### vim.api

Neovim also defines a bunch of api functions under a sub module `api` under
`vim` module. See
[code](https://github.com/neovim/neovim/blob/7e97c773e3ba78fcddbb2a0b9b0d572c8210c83e/src/nvim/lua/executor.c#L743).
The corresponding file `lua_api_c_bindings.generated.c` is auto generated. I
copy part of its content as below

```c
void nlua_add_api_functions(lua_State *lstate)
  FUNC_ATTR_NONNULL_ALL
{
  lua_createtable(lstate, 0, 175);

  lua_pushcfunction(lstate, &nlua_api_nvim_get_autocmds);
  lua_setfield(lstate, -2, "nvim_get_autocmds");
  lua_pushcfunction(lstate, &nlua_api_nvim_create_autocmd);
  lua_setfield(lstate, -2, "nvim_create_autocmd");
  lua_pushcfunction(lstate, &nlua_api_nvim_del_autocmd);
  lua_setfield(lstate, -2, "nvim_del_autocmd");
  lua_pushcfunction(lstate, &nlua_api_nvim_clear_autocmds);
  lua_setfield(lstate, -2, "nvim_clear_autocmds");
  ...
  lua_pushcfunction(lstate, &nlua_api_nvim_win_text_height);
  lua_setfield(lstate, -2, "nvim_win_text_height");
  lua_setfield(lstate, -2, "api");
}
```

## Event loop

## Tips

- The `=` trick: `:lua =jit.version`. Adding `=` in front of the command means
  printing out the result. It avoids adding `vim.print()`.
- When debugging plugins, we sometimes need to print out the content of some
  variable. There is a universal pretty print function: `vim.inspect`. So,
  `vim.notify(vim.inspect(...))` is pretty much what you need.
- Run current lua buffer `:luafile %`. So we can use Neovim as a Lua
  playground.
- Format JSON.
  - For the whole file `:%!jq .`. Also, for malformed json, use
    [jfc](https://github.com/mr-adult/JFC) instead. `%!jfc -r`.
  - Format a selection: After selection, then type `:`, then it will show up
    `:'<,'>`. Type `:'<,'>!jq .`.
- Three ways to add a char to the end of a range of lines.
  - `:<range>s/$/<char>/g`
  - `:<range>normal A<char>`
  - `Ctrl-v` visual block mode -> type `$` -> type `A` and `<char>`
- Set LSP log level `:lua vim.lsp.log.set_level('debug')`. This new log level
  will write all requests and responses to the lsp log.
